# Homework 9

This is the last homework for Part 1 of the PLT course.  It is designed to help
you review some important topics we have discussed in Part 1 of the course.
Please try your best to finish it.  If you can not figure something out after
trying hard or if you have a potential answer but are not sure, do not hesitate
to ask me.

Note that the _soft_ deadline is the end of **Saturday, January 11, 2014**, and
the _hard_ deadline is the end of **Sunday, January 12, 2014**.

## Problem 1: Class-Based Object-Oriented Language 

The following tasks will guide you through refining the Mini-OO language
presented in the lecture.  Try to finish them one by one.  They should help you
review topics like substitution, environments, first-class values, etc.  Keep
your solution for each task in one _standalone_ text or source file.

### Task 1: Review Question

The interepreter for Mini-OO presented in the
[lecture](../../lecturenotes/20-OO.scala) is substitution-based.  But the
substitution function `subst` defined there did not consider variable capturing
at all.  Why?

### Task 2: Programming in Mini-OO

Create new test cases for Mini-OO.  Note that this includes creating new
classes and building new expressions that use these classes. _Hint:_ Study the
boolean arithmetic example in the lecture notes.

### Task 3: Environment-Based Interpreter for Mini-OO

Turn the substitution-based interpreter for Mini-OO into an environment-based
one.

_Hint:_ Review the transition from the substitution-based interpreter to the
evironment-based interpreter for [F1WAE](../../lecturenotes/04-f1wae.scala).
In particular, find out what is _first_ done for that transition.  Then try to
figure out what is the _same_ thing you need to do to launch the transition for
this Mini-OO language.

Do not confuse the repository `classes` for classes and the environment for
substitutions.  They are two different _namespaces_.  Keep them separate for
this task.

### Task 4: Local Varible Bindings

In the above envrionment-based interpreter for Mini-OO, the environment grows
only when a method is called.  There is no way for the user to introduce local
variables.  To enable local variable bindings, we bring back our familiar
`Let`-construct:

```scala
case class Let(vname : Symbol, vdef : Exp, body : Exp) extends Exp
```

Extend your environment-based interpreter from Task 3 to support the good old
`let`-expression.

### Task 5: User-Declared Classes

So far, the user of Mini-OO can not declare a class: she can not add any new
class to the repository `classes`, only we language implementers can.  To give
the user a more useful language, we should remove this restriction.  Toward
this end, we need a new syntactic category called `Prg` for programs:

```scala
abstract class Prg

case class Main(exp : Exp) extends Prg
case class With(cname : Symbol, cdef : Class, body : Prg) extends Prg
```

So a user program is either a `Main` expression or a `With`-construct that
introduces a new class `cdef` called `cname` that can be used in the `body` of
her program.  Note that `body` is itself again a `Prg` so it can be either
a `Main`-expression or another `With`-construct.  So the user can introduce
more classes by nesting `With`-constructs.

Now that `Prg` becomes the subject of our interpreter, define a new evaluator
in Scala (call it new `evalPrg` or overload the old `eval`) together with the
old `eval` (copy it from Task 4, which still interprets an expression) that can
interpret a user program.

```scala
def evalPrg(prg : Prg, classes : Map[Symbol, Class]) = ...

def evalTest(prg : Prg) = evalPrg(prg, Map())
```

Test your implementation on earlier examples by first converting them into
`Prg`s.

### Task 6: First-Class Classes for Mini-OO

Till now, classes in Mini-OO are not treated as first-class citizens.  This
final task will grant them first-class citizenship.  Redesign Mini-OO to
support first-class classes, then implement it. 

_Hint:_ Review how we do this to functions when we move from
[F1WAE](../../lecturenotes/04-f1wae.scala) to
[FAE](../../lecturenotes/05-fae.scala).  In particular, notice that FAE, while
supporting first-class functions, is even _simpler_ than F1WAE.  This should
inspire your redesign of Mini-OO.  The situation is also quite similar.  From
Task 1 to 5, we have obtained a series of languages and implementations.  The
language and its implementation from Task 5 is indeed complicated in a similar
way as F1WAE.  Identify their similarities should give you enough clues to
accomplish the task.  To design the language, you need determine the primitive
language constructs.  Think carefully what constructs are essential.  For
example, do we still need `Prg` introduced in Task 5?  To implement the
language, you need decide the meaning of every primitive language construct.
Think carefully what results are proper.  For example, what if results contain
free variables?  The following key terms may also help: _namespaces_,
_first-class functions_, _anonymous functions_, _first-class classes_,
_anonymous classes_, _closures_, _local variable bindings_.

Port those old examples to your redesigned Mini-OO and test your implementation
on them.

## Problem 2: Feedback on Part 1 of PLT

Write down your feedback on Part 1 of the PLT course, including both the
lecture and the exercise session.  Feel free to talk about anything.

