# Exercise 6

## Presentation

## Continuations

Given the arithmetic expression `1 + 2 - x`, assume a _call-by-value_,
_left-to-right_ evaluation order, we can identify 7 continuations during the
evaluation of the expression (at the top level).  They are the continuation

1. `[]` awaiting the value of `1 + 2 - x`
2. `1 + 2 [] x` awaiting the value of `-`
3. `[] - x` awaiting the value of `1 + 2`
4. `1 [] 2 - x` awaiting the value of `+`
5. `[] + 2 - x` awaiting the value of `1`
6. `1 + [] - x` awaiting the value of `2`
7. `3 - []` awaiting the value of `x`

## Tail Calls

Tail calls are explained as follows using the high-level concept of
continuation.  For a low-level explanation (that I attempted in the exercise
session), see the paper [Lambda: The Ultimate
GOTO](http://repository.readscheme.org/ftp/papers/ai-lab-pubs/AIM-443.pdf).

### Tail Position

An expression `e1` is in _tail position_ with respect to an enclosing
expression `e2` if the continuation `c1` of `e1` is _effectively_ the same as
the continutation `c2` of `e2` so that the value of `e1` when passed to `c1` is
then immediately passed to `c2`.

For example, the expression `n` is _not_ in tail position in the `then`-branch
but in tail position in the `else`-branch of the expression `if (n < 0) then (-
n) else n`

### Tail Call

A function call occurs in tail position is a _tail call_.  For example, in the
following Haskell code, the recursive call of `fac` does _not_ occur in tail
position in the body of the function (an `if`-expression), hence _not_ a tail
call; whereas the recursive call of `fact` _does_ occur in tail position of the
body of the function (again an `if`-expression), hence a tail call.

```haskell
fac n =
  if n == 0
    then 1
    else n * fac (n - 1)

fact f n =
  if n == 0
    then f
    else fact (f * n) (n - 1)
```

### Tail-Call Optimization

The value of a tail call can be passed directly to the continuation of its
enclosing expression, bypassing its own continuation.  So its own continuation
can be optimized away hence does not even have to be created and saved at all.
This process of eliminating the continuaton of a tail call, effectively
replacing it with the continuation of its eclosing expression is called
_tail-call optimization_.  Since continuations are usually saved onto a stack,
tail-call optimization saves space on this stack.

### Tail Recursion

If the recursive call in a recursive-function is a tail call, it is called
_tail recursive_.  This form of recursion is called _tail recursion_.  With
tail-call optimization, tail recursion can be as efficient as iteration (loop)
in space.  Consider the evaluation of `fac 3` and `fact 1 3`.  The definition
of `fac` is not tail recursive.  Tail-call optimization can not be applied to
save space for intermediate continuations.  This means, the stack for storing
continuations will keep growing while more and more continuations are pushed
onto it, until it overflows.

```
[fac 3]
3 * [fac 2]
3 * 2 * [fac 1]
3 * 2 * 1 * [fac 0]
3 * 2 * [1 * 1]
3 * [2 * 1]
[3 * 2]
[6]
```

The definition of `fact` is tail recursive.  Tail-call optimization eliminates
intermediate continuations.  The continuation on top of the stack keeps being
replaced.  In other words, the stack does not grow.  The computation is
accomplished in constant space.

```
[fact 1 3]
[fact 3 2]
[fact 6 1]
[fact 6 0]
[6]
```

In a language that does not do tail-call optimization, tail-recursive
function-calls consume spaces of the stack in the same way as
non-tail-recursive function-calls because intermediate continuations.  Python
does not do tail-call optimization.  So the following port of the `fac` and
`fact` when called with large inputs both cause stack-overflow.

```python
def fac(n):
    if n == 0: return 1
    else: return n * fac(n - 1)

def fact(f, n):
    if n == 0: return f
    else: return fact(f * n, n - 1)
```

