# Homework 8

## Monad Laws

To qualify as a monad, a type constructor plus an implementation of `unit` and
`bind` of the correct type is _not_ enough.  In addition, they must also
respect the following three algebraic laws:

- Left identity: `bind(unit(x), f)` = `f(x)`

- Right identity: `bind(m, unit)` = `m`

- Associativity: `bind(bind(m, f), g)` = `bind(m, (x => bind(f(x), g)))`

Note two things:

- In this exercise, Scala is our object language, English plus mathematics is
our meta-language.  We already know that we can use a meta-language (Scala) to
_implement_ object languages like AE, WAE, FAE, etc.  Here we use
a meta-language (English plus mathematics) to _discuss_ (the properties of) an
object language (Scala).  You have been exposed to this discussion since the
very beginning of the course: lectures, comments, exercises all _discuss_
Scala.  In summary, we use Scala to _implement_ languages like AE, WAE, FAE
etc., and we use English plus mathematics to _discuss_ our implementations in
Scala.  Properly layered according to the meaning of the prefix
[meta-](http://www.ldoceonline.com/dictionary/meta-), AE, WAE, FAE, etc. are
our object languages, Scala is our meta-language, and English plus mathematics
is our meta-meta-language.  Now comes the _real_ point: the equal sign '=' in
the above three laws are _not_ the equal sign `=` in Scala, they belong to our
meta-meta-language, that is, English plus mathematics.  So this exercise does
_not_ require Scala programming or testing, but _does_ require Scala program
understanding and mathematical equational reasoning.  For example, we can
establish the equality between the Scala expressions `((x : Int)(y : Int) =>
x + y)(1)(2)` and `3` via the following equational reasoning according to the
(substitution-based) evaluation rules of Scala:

      `((x : Int)(y : Int) => x + y)(1)(2)`
    = `((y : Int) => 1 + y)(2)`
    = `1 + 2`
    = `3`

- The annonymous function appearing in the Associativity law may not be quite
valid Scala per se due to the lack of parameter type.  But assume that all
variables appearing in the above three laws are well typed in the surrounding
context so that all expressions involved in the equations are valid in Scala.
For example, for the first equation to make sense, if `x` has type `A`, then
`f` should have type `A => M[B]`.  Actually, when you do equational reasoning,
you should make sure that all expressions through your equational reasoning,
including those in intermediate steps, are well typed in Scala.

Your tasks are:

1. Rephrase the three laws in terms the `do`-notation defined below:

    `do(x, m, e)` = `bind(m, x => e)`

   _Hint:_ Look closer, doesn't it ring a bell?

2. Show that the `IdentityMonad`, the `ReaderMonad`, the `StateMonad` and the
`ContinuatioinMonad` (_optional_, _recommended_) all satisfy these laws.  You
can choose to work with the definitions in either lecture note
[18-monads.scala](../../lecturenotes/18-monads.scala) or
[monad-library.scala](../../lecturenotes/19-monads-library.scala).

3. Why do you think monads should abey these monad laws?

## Monads in Action

### Programming Task 1

Take [WAE](../../lecturenotes/03-wae.scala) extended with support for division
(see [Problem 3 of Homework 1](../hw01/hw01.md#problem-3)).  Recall that for
division, what we did before is to check whether the divisor evaluates to zero,
and if so we invoke `sys.error` to report an error.  The drawback of this
approach is that the exception caused by the user's attempt to divide a number
by zero in our object-language gets mapped to an exception in our
meta-language.  As a result, what the user see is not a friendly error message
telling her that it is wrong to divide a number by zero in the language she is
using, but that the interpreter breaks with obscure error messages from the
implementation language.  Scala works like this.  If you try `1 / 0` in the
Scala REPL, although it will not cause the REPL to break, you get tons of error
messages related to Java!  Since we are using poorly-behaved Scala in this
sense to implement our object language, the situation of our user is even
worse, she would see the interpreter breaks with error messages not even from
Scala but from Java!  This is like I execute a C program in which there is an
expression that divides a number by zero and get tons of error messages telling
me that the CPU crashed!  We do not want to put our user in such a horrible
situation.  The general way to avoid this is to handle exceptions from the user
program in the object language ourselves instead of by mapping them to
exceptions in the meta-language.  In order to catch this _division-by-zero_
exception, we need to encrich our representation for numbers with a special
value `NaN` (short for _Not a Number) that represents the exception:

```scala
abstract class Exp

case class Var(sym : Symbol) extends Exp
case class Wth(vname : Symbol, vdef : Exp, body : Exp) extends Exp
case class Num(int : Int) extends Exp
case class Add(lhs : Exp, rhs : Exp) extends Exp
case class Mul(lhs : Exp, rhs : Exp) extends Exp
case class Div(lhs : Exp, rhs : Exp) extends Exp

abstract class NumV

case class NOV(num : Int) extends NumV  // NO is short for Number
case class NaN extends NumV

type Env = Map[Symbol, Val]
```

Reimplement `eval` so that whenever a `NaN` is encountered in evaluation, it
returns `NaN` as result.

```scala
def eval(exp : Exp, env : Env) : NumV = ...
```

Make sure your implementation pass at least the following tests and more:

```scala
val iniEnv : Env = Map()

def evalTest(exp : Exp) : NumV = eval(exp, iniEnv)

assert(evalTest(Div(Num(1), Num(0))) == NaN)
assert(evalTest(Add(Num(1), Div(Num(2), Num(0)))) == NaN)
assert(evalTest(Sub(Div(Num(1), Num(0)), Num(2))) == NaN)
```

### Programming Task 2

Note that the above implementation is quite verbose.  Look carefully for the
repeatitions in your code.  You should identify some patterns.  Monads can
capture these patterns, abstract away the verbosity and simplify your code.
Your taks is to refactor your code from above to a monadic style.

_Hint:_ Recall that to form a monad, you need first a type constructor, then
implementations of `unit` and `bind` with proper types, and last verification
of the three monad laws.  The new data type `NumV` can be easily turned into
a type constructor by giving it a parameter.  Study carefully how the
`OptionMonad` is defined in the lecture notes should give you enough clue to
work out your monad definition.

## Syntactic Sugar and Desugaring

Syntactic sugar stands for syntactic constructs added to a language to make the
taste of the language a bit sweeter: these constructs make the program easier
to read or write.  On the other hand, these constructs are not essential to the
language because they can always be transformed to those essential ones.  We
call this transformation desugaring.

So far, we have encountered several syntactic constructs that we claim to be
syntactic sugar.  For example, after introducing
[FAE](../../lecturenotes/05-fae.scala), we said that the `With` (hereafter
called `Let`) construct can be provided as syntactic sugar.  We even give
a definition like the following:

```scala
def let(vname : Symbol, vdef : Exp, body : Exp) = App(Fun(vname, body), vdef)
```

However, this definition does _not_ give the user of our object language (i.e.,
the implemented language) FAE the `Let` construct as syntactic sugar.  Because
`let` here is defined as a meta-function in our meta-language (i.e., the
implementation language) Scala!  We ourselves, as language designer and
implementer, have access to `let`: whenever we want to write `App(Fun('x,
Var('x)), Num(1))`, we can write the shorter and clearer `let('x, Num(1),
Var('x))` instead.  Scala will interpret it and replace it with `App(Fun('x,
Var('x)), Num(1))` whereever it appears.  So it benefits us.  But since it is
a meta-function, the user of the object language does _not_ have any access to
it.  Whenever the user wants to write an expression in the FAE language, the
only constructs she can use are those provided by our declaration: `Var`,
`Fun`, `App`, `Num` and `If0`.  In other words, we have _not_ provided the user
the syntactic sugar yet.  But the beneficial `let` can be easily promoted to
the object language level.  The way to achieve this is to first extend our
construct declaration for FAE with a new construct `Let`:

```scala
abstract class Exp

// primitive constructs
case class Var(name : Symbol) extends Exp
case class Fun(pname : Symbol, body : Exp) extends Exp
case class App(fexp : Exp, aexp : Exp) extends Exp
case class Num(num : Int) extends Exp
case class Add(lexp : Exp, rexp : Exp) extends Exp
case class If0(cond : Exp, texp : Exp, fexp : Exp) extends Exp

abstract class Val

type Env = Map[Symbol, Val]

case class NumV(num : Int) extends Val
case class CloV(pname : Symbol, body : Exp, env : Env) extends Val

// the good old `eval`
def eval(exp : Exp, env : Env) : Val = ...

// syntactic sugar
case class Let(vname : Symbol, vdef : Exp, body : Exp) extends Exp
```

With this new `Let` construct, now the user can also write `Let('x, Num(1),
Var('x))` to mean `App(Fun('x, Var('x)), Num(1))`.  Although we have added this
new construct, we do not want to modify our interpreter to handle this new
case.  Instead, we turn expressions built using this new construct into
expressions expressed using more primitive constructs, so `Let('x, Num(1),
Var('x))` will be turned into `App(Fun('x, Var('x)), Num(1))`.  But note that
this addition gives the user the freedom to use `Let` wherever it makes sense.
In other words, `Let` can now appear everywhere an `Exp` is allowed!  For
example, it may appear as the `body` of a `Fun`.  So given an expression by the
user, we need to find every occurrence of `Let` in this expression and desugar
it to its corresponding more primitive expression.  Your task is to define such
a desugaring procedure:

```scala
def desugar(exp : Exp) : Exp = ...
```

The result of `desugar(exp)` will be an expression built using only primitive
constructs.  How should you evaluate expressions now?  _Hint:_ Directly call
the good old `eval` will not work, because an expression now may contain `Let`.
Give a new evaluation function called `eval1`:

```scala
def eval1(exp : Exp, env : Env) : Val = ...
```

Make sure your implementation pass the following tests and more.

```
val iniEnv : Env = Map()

def evalTest(exp : Exp) : Val = eval1(exp, iniEnv)

assert(evalTest(Let('x, Num(1), Var('x))) == NumV(1))
assert(evalTest(App(Fun('y, Let('x, Num(1), Add(Var('x), Var('y)))), Num(2))) == NumV(3))
```

