# Problem 1

## Review Question

In the mark-and-sweep garbage collector presented in the lecture on [Garbage
Collection](../../lecturenotes/10-gc.scala), we use _breadth-first_ traversal
to mark reachable nodes.  What potential problem could it cause in a _real_
interpreter?

## Programming Task

Modify the code to use _depth-first_ traveral instead.  Does it improve the
situation?  If yes, why?  If no, why not?

# Problem 2

We have learned in the lecture on [syntactic interpreter vs.
meta-interpreter](../../lecturenotes/11-syntacticvsmeta.scala) the syntactic
approach and the meta-approach are the two ends of a spectrum of interpreters.
We have seen two interpreters in the lecture that move toward the meta-end. The
one using HOAS is at the meta-end, and the one using meta-closures is in
between.  In fact, most of the interpreters we have seen and implemented so far
are between the two ends.  For example, the interpreter for
[FAE](../../lecturenotes/05-fae.scala), compared to the above mentioned two
interpreters, is way much more syntatic.  However, it is still not syntactic
enough.  In particular, integers in the object language FAE is directly mapped
into integers in the meta-language Scala.  This means, integers in FAE suffers
the same size limits of integers in Scala.  One benefit of moving our
interpreter toward the syntactic end along the spectrum is that it allows us to
implement richer features in the object language.  Your task is to support [big
numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbitrary-precision_arithmetic) in FAE.
You should support at least bignum addition and subtraction in your
implementation.  Test your implementation with operations on big numbers.  If
you want to test some interesting examples like the factorial function, you
should choose [RCFAE](../../lecturenotes/08-rcfae.scala) instead because it
requires recursion.  Note that you are _not_ allowed to use the `BigInt`
library of Scala, do it yourself!

# Problem 3

In the lecture on [Church
encodings](../../lecturenotes/12-churchencoding.scala), we have seen Church
encodings in FAE of booleans, numerals and operations on them.  This exercise
requires you to use them to accomplish some simple programming tasks.

1. We have seen how the exponent operation `exp` is defined in terms of `mult`
   and `one`.  Give a similar definition of `mult` in terms of `add` and
   `zero`.

2. Study carefully how `multlist` works.  Then define a function called
   `sumlist` that sums all Church-numerals in a list.

3. Define a function called `allzeros` that tests whether a list of Church
   numerals are all zeros.

Do not forget to test your definitions.

