# Homework 7

## Problem 1

### Question 1

Read the following program in [Racket](http://racket-lang.org/).  Describe what
the function `count` and `product` do and how they achieve it.  For `product`,
what is the difference between this version and one implemented using `fold`?

```racket
(define (loop procedure)
  (procedure)
  (loop procedure))

(define (count n)
  (let/cc exit
    (let ([m 1])
      (loop (lambda ()
              (if (= m n)
                  (exit m)
                  (begin (printf "~a~n" m)  ; print `m` in a line
                         (set! m (+ m 1)))))))))  ; increment `m` by 1

(define (product numbers)
  (let/cc return
    (letrec ([prod (lambda (ns)
                     (if (empty? ns)
                         1
                         (let ([n (first ns)])
                           (if (= n 0)
                               (return n)
                               (begin (printf "~a~n" n)
                                      (* n (prod (rest ns))))))))])
      (prod numbers))))
```

We have studied most constructs used in the program.  You should not need to
actually learn Racket to read the program.  In case you really need, take
a look at [the quick guide](http://docs.racket-lang.org/quick/).  If you are
not quite sure about what they do, copy and paste the program into the
definition area of [DrRacket](http://racket-lang.org/download/), click the
<button type="button">Run</button> button to load the program, type in the
following expressions (one at a time) in the interaction area (after the prompt
`>`) and hit <button type="button">Enter</button> to ask DrRacket to evaluate
the expression.  The last line of the output is the result of the expression.
Other lines are from `printf` used in the above definitions.

```racket
(count 3)

(count 5)

(product (list 1 2 3 4 5))

(product (list 1 2 0 4 5))
```

### Question 2

Is it possible to implment the `Letcc` construct presented in the lecture on
[first-class continuations](../../lecturenotes/16-firstclasscontinuations.scala) 
using a direct-style (i.e., not CPS-transformed) interpreter plus
CPS-transformed programs?  If yes, give a definition of `Letcc(k : Symbol, body : Exp)`,
that is, `def Letcc(k : Symbol, body : Exp) : Exp = ...`, assuming `cps : Exp => Exp`.
If no, explain why.  _Hint:_ You may want to review 
[other combinations](https://github.com/klauso/PLT2013/blob/master/exercises/ex07.md#first-class-continuations)
we have discussed in the exercise session for the same question.

## Problem 2

1. Lambda-lift the following program.  Make sure the lambda-lifted program
gives the same result as the orginal one.

    ```scala
    val a : Int = 2

    val b : Int = 1

    def foldRight[A, B](f : (A, B) => B, z : B, l : List[A]) = {
      def foldr(l : List[A]) : B = l match {
        case Nil => z
        case x :: xs => f(x, foldr(xs))
      }
      foldr(l)
    }

    foldRight((x : Int, y : Int) => a * x + b, 1, List(3, 2, 1))
    ```

2. Defunctionalize the lambda-lifted program from Step 1.  Make sure the
defunctionalized program still gives the same result.

3. Repeat Step 1 and 2 for the following call of `foldRight`.

    ```scala
    foldRight((f : Int => Int, g : Int => Int) => (x : Int) => f(g(x)),
              (x : Int) => x,
              List((x : Int) => x + b, (x : Int) => a * x))
    ```

## Problem 3

### Programming Task 1

In all interpreters we have seen so far, binary operations on integers in the
object language are built into the language as primitive constructs.  Being
a primitive construct forces us to have a separate case for it in our
interpreter to handle them.  But it is obvious that the processing of these
operations are quite similar.  In fact, instead of building them into the
language as primitive constructs, we can join them into one case by treating
them as _primitive functions_.  This way, once we dedicate a case (_Hint:_
where?) in our interpreter to handle primitive functions, we can recover
support of addition and multiplication in the object language.  The following
declarations shows exactly how to achieve this.

```scala
abstract class Exp

case class Var(name : Symbol) extends Exp
case class Fun(pname : Symbol, body : Exp) extends Exp
case class App(fexp : Exp, aexp : Exp) extends Exp
case class Num(num : Int) extends Exp
case class If0(cond : Exp, texp : Exp, fexp : Exp) extends Exp

abstract class Val

type Env = Map[Symbol, Val]
type Cnt = Val => Val

case class NumV(num : Int) extends Val
case class CloV(pname : Symbol, body : Exp, env : Env) extends Val  // closure
case class PrFV(metaf : (Exp, Env, Cnt) => Val) extends Val  // primitive function
```

Now addition and multiplication can be defined using `PrFV` and a meta-function
(in Scala) of type `(Exp, Env, Cnt) => Val`.  For example, suppose addition is
defined as `PrFV(add)`, the meta-function `add` when applied (_Hint:_ when?) to
its left sub-expression (together with the environment and continuation at that
moment) is supposed to hand to the passed-in continuation another primitive
function which can be `App`lied to the right sub-expression.  In other words,
addition and multiplication are implemented in such a way that they can be
considered curried.  Once we have the definitions for addition and
multiplication, we can bind them respectively to the name `'+` and `'*` in an
initial environment:

```scala
def eval(exp : Exp, env : Env, cnt : Cnt) : Val = ...

def add : (Exp, Env, Cnt) => Val = ...

def mul : (Exp, Env, Cnt) => Val = ... 

val iniEnv : Env = Map('+ -> PrFV(add), '* -> PrFV(mul))
val iniCnt : Cnt = v => v
```

When `eval` (in continuation-passing style) is called with `iniEnv` and
`iniCnt`, we will be able to evaluate expressions that use `Var('+)` and
`Var('*)`.  Your task is to implement `eval` and give the right definitions for
`add` and `mul`.  Make sure your interpreter pass the following tests:

```scala
def evalTest(exp : Exp) : Val = eval(exp, iniEnv, iniCnt)

assert(evalTest(App(App(Var('+), Num(1)), Num(2))) == NumV(3))
assert(evalTest(App(App(Var('*), Num(2)), Num(3))) == NumV(6))
```

Finally, describe what is the benefit of this approach.

### Programming Task 2

The Scheme programming language (and its descent Racket) provides a primitive
function named `call-with-current-continuation`, usually abbreviated as
`call/cc` (or `callcc`).  `callcc` is called with another function as argument,
as in `callcc(f)`.  The function `f` passed to `callcc` expects as argument the
current continuation of the whole expression `callcc(f)`.  The bound
continuation then may be used in the body of `f`.  All this requires the
support of first-class continuations (as we have seen in the lecture).  So we
extend `Val` with `CntV` which turns continuations into values.

```scala
case class CntV(cnt : Cnt) extends Val  // continuation
```

Your task is to provide `callcc` as a primitive function in your implementation
obtained from above.  Note that you need first extend `eval` to handle the
application of a continuation.  Make sure your definition of `callcc` pass the
following tests:

```scala
assert(evalTest(App(Var('callcc), Fun('k, Num(2)))) == NumV(2))
assert(evalTest(App(Var('callcc), Fun('k, App(Var('k), Num(2))))) == NumV(2))
assert(evalTest(App(Var('callcc), Fun('k, App(App(Var('+), Num(1)), App(Var('k), Num(2)))))) == NumV(2))
```

It turns out that `Letcc` and `callcc` are mutually definable.  Give
a definition of `Letcc` using `callcc` (i.e., `def Letcc(k : Symbol, body : Exp) : Exp = ...`)
and then a definition of `callcc` using `Letcc` (i.e., `def callcc(f : Fun) : Exp = ...`).
For the latter, you do not have to include the interpreter from the lecture
note.  Just give the defintion.  _Hint:_ Answering this question first may give
you some clue to accomplish the programming task.

